Coarse summary of the paper (#65)
zurutech/zurutech.github.io: _posts/2021-10-13-3d-bonet.md

---
author: "lgrementieri"
layout: "post"
title:  "3D instance segmentation with 3D-BoNet: analysis and TensorFlow 2 implementation"
slug:   "3D instance segmentation with 3D-BoNet: analysis and TensorFlow 2 implementation"
date:    2021-10-13 8:00:00
categories: machine-learning
image: images/3dbonet/3d-bonet-architecture.png
tags: machine-learning
---

Instance segmentation on point clouds is a challenging problem. Point clouds are unordered, sparse, non-uniform, and finding non-regulars shapes is not trivial. Moreover, the number of points in a scene can easily surpass the million, making every algorithm on point clouds very computationally expensive.

> The 3D-BoNet architecture [1] has been introduced recently to tackle the problem. This network is trainable end-to-end, and it mixes the results of a bounding box prediction branch with the output of a semantic segmentation branch to perform instance segmentation. The article contains a walkthrough of the paper, section by section, and eventually introduces our implementation in TensorFlow 2 obtained refactoring the original code in TensorFlow 1.

Author: I would add another line like

```
If you're not interested in the walkthrough of the paper, you can directly jump a the [implementation](#implementation).
```

<div class="blog-image-container">
    <figure>
        <img class="blog-image" alt="point mask prediction branch" src="/images/3dbonet/instance-header.png">
        <figcaption>A sample extracted from the paper [1]. On the left the input point cloud, center the instance segmentation result with 3D-BoNet, right the ground truth.</figcaption>
    </figure>
</div>

## Introduction

Instance segmentation is the natural intersection between object detection and semantic segmentation. Object detection tries to identify instances within the point cloud, while semantic segmentation assigns a semantic class to every point in the cloud.
Instance segmentation aims to classify every point like semantic segmentation, but now distinct objects from the same semantic class have different labels. For this reason, an instance segmentation model should be able to reason over multiple scales: it has to recognize fine details to classify the points correctly, and, at the same time, it has to take into account objects in their entirety.

> Analysis of point clouds is burdensome because point clouds are inherently unordered, unstructured, and non-uniform. The approaches to work with point clouds can be divided into three families: projection-based, discretization-based, and point-based methods. In project-based methods, the point cloud is projected to a plane, and the resulting image is analyzed with image processing techniques. Discretization-based approaches organize points in a grid of voxels summarizing the point features in voxels. This discretization allows using 3D convolutional neural networks because it imposes a regular geometric structure. The main drawback of this representation is its memory footprint, which can be very high if the scene covers a large section of space.

Author: project-based should be projection-based as mentioned in the previous statement

The 3D-BoNet approach is point-based like SGPN [2], ASIS [3], JSIS3D [4], MASC [5], 3D-BEVIS [6], but all these methods do not explicitly detect object boundaries (i.e, the bounding boxes). Furthermore, they require computationally intensive post-processing, such as mean-shift clustering.

Unlike previous models, 3D-BoNet directly regresses the vertices of instance bounding boxes. Then, it selects the points belonging to the instance applying a binary classifier to the points within the bounding box. For doing this, the authors introduced a **bounding box prediction module** and a series of carefully designed loss functions to directly learn object boolean masks.

> The pure 3D-BoNet method does not require post-processing, but it only works on small point clouds, usually composed of 4096 points. It is necessary to split the cloud into spatial blocks to manage more numerous point clouds. A spatial block contains the points belonging to a vertical square column of space. The number of points in a block is constant to allow the creation of batches. For this reason, from a single spatial block, many processing blocks are created by sampling points.

Author: "A spatial block contains the points belonging to a vertical square column of space."

Sounds strange. I would rephrase it like "A spatial block contains the point belonging to a rectangular parallelepiped with square base" or something similar (?)

The **Bounding Box Prediction Branch** (BBPB) takes global features $$\textbf{F}_g$$ as input and regresses a **predefined and fixed set of bounding boxes** $$B$$ and the corresponding box scores $$B_s$$.

During the training, this branch is supervised with ground truth boxes. The **bounding box association layer** associates the most similar predicted bounding box to every ground truth box. The output of the association layer is a list of indices $$\textbf{A}$$ that describes the best pairing between boxes. Paired boxes are then compared with a multi-criteria loss.
The bounding box association layer and multi-criteria loss (the content of the yellow box in the figure) are discarded for inference.

In parallel with the BBPB, predicted boxes, local features $$\textbf{F}_l$$ and global features $$\textbf{F}_g$$ are fed into the **Point Mask Prediction Branch** (PMPB).

### Bounding Box Prediction Branch (BBPB)

<div class="blog-image-container">
    <figure>
        <img class="blog-image" alt="bbox prediction" src="/images/3dbonet/3d-bo-net-bbox.png">
    <figcaption> Bounding Box Predictiond Branch architecture </figcaption>
    </figure>
</div>

> The goal of the BBPB is to predict a rectangular bounding box for each instance in a single forward pass without relying on predefined spatial anchors or RPN (Region Proposal Network). A bounding box is parametrized by a pair of opposed vertices: $$ \{ [x_\text{min}, y_\text{min}, z_\text{min}], [x_\text{max}, y_\text{max}, z_\text{max}]\} $$

Author: "rectangular bounding box" is somehow redundant since a bounding box is the minimum enclosing rectangle, hence I'd remove "rectangular"

because the memory consumption of a single forward pass can easily exceed the memory available on a GPU.
The problem is even more relevant during training when gradients have to be stored along with layer outputs.
For this reason, it is necessary to devise a strategy to train and use the model on large point clouds.

### Subsampling

First of all, it is always a good idea to subsample the point cloud to remove points in highly dense regions.
There are many methods to prune points in dense regions: in our implementation, the subsampling preserves only one point per voxel in a grid.
More in detail, the 3D space of points is divided virtually into voxels by a cubic grid whose size is a parameter of the experiment.
For every voxel, a single point is preserved. Its coordinates are obtained by averaging the coordinates of all points in the voxel.

This method is easy to implement, and it can reduce the number of points in the point cloud by one order of magnitude, but it is still not sufficient.

### Block Merging

The authors of 3D-BoNet propose to use Block Merging [2] to split the point cloud into fixed-sized blocks of points. Let us see how blocks are created.

> First of all,  the 3D space is partitioned in overlapping squared columns of infinite height. 

Author: squared columns ->  rectangular square-based parallelepipeds?

---
author: "lgrementieri"
layout: "post"
title:  "3D instance segmentation with 3D-BoNet: analysis and TensorFlow 2 implementation"
slug:   "3D instance segmentation with 3D-BoNet: analysis and TensorFlow 2 implementation"
date:    2021-10-13 8:00:00
categories: machine-learning
image: images/3dbonet/3d-bonet-architecture.png
tags: machine-learning
---

Instance segmentation on point clouds is a challenging problem. Point clouds are unordered, sparse, non-uniform, and finding non-regulars shapes is not trivial. Moreover, the number of points in a scene can easily surpass the million, making every algorithm on point clouds very computationally expensive.

> The 3D-BoNet architecture [1] has been introduced recently to tackle the problem. This network is trainable end-to-end, and it mixes the results of a bounding box prediction branch with the output of an instance segmentation branch. The article contains a walkthrough of the paper, section by section, and at the end introduces the steps we followed to convert the original implementation (in TensorFlow 1) to our own implementation in TensorFlow 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 3D-BoNet architecture [1] has been introduced recently to tackle the problem. This network is trainable end-to-end, and it mixes the results of a bounding box prediction branch with the output of an instance segmentation branch. The article contains a walkthrough of the paper, section by section, and eventually introduces the steps we followed to convert the original implementation (in TensorFlow 1) to our implementation in TensorFlow 2.
```

Reviewer 2: I have changed the sentence  applying the suggested edits too.

Instance segmentation aims to classify every point like semantic segmentation, but now distinct objects from the same semantic class have different labels. For this reason, an instance segmentation model should be able to reason over multiple scales: it has to recognize fine details to classify the points correctly, and, at the same time, it has to take into account objects in their entirety.

Analysis of point clouds is burdensome because point clouds are inherently unordered, unstructured, and non-uniform. The approaches to work with point clouds can be divided into three families: projection-based, discretization-based, and point-based methods. In project-based methods, the point cloud is projected to a plane, and the resulting image is analyzed with image processing techniques. Discretization-based approaches organize points in a grid of voxels summarizing the point features in voxels. This discretization allows using 3D convolutional neural networks because it imposes a regular geometric structure. The main drawback of this representation is its memory footprint, which can be very high if the scene covers a large section of space.

> The 3D-BoNet approach is point-based like SGPN [2], ASIS [3], JSIS3D [4], MASC [5], 3D-BEVIS [6], but all these methods do not explicitly detect object boundaries (the bounding boxes). Furthermore, they require computationally intensive post-processing, like mean-shift clustering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 3D-BoNet approach is point-based like SGPN [2], ASIS [3], JSIS3D [4], MASC [5], 3D-BEVIS [6], but all these methods do not explicitly detect object boundaries (i.e, the bounding boxes). Furthermore, they require computationally intensive post-processing, such as mean-shift clustering.
```

> Differently from previous models, 3D-BoNet directly regresses the vertices of instance bounding boxes. Then it selects the points belonging to the instance with a binary classifier applied to the points within the bounding box. For doing this, the authors introduced a **bounding box prediction module** and a series of carefully designed loss functions to directly learn object boolean masks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike previous models, 3D-BoNet directly regresses the vertices of instance bounding boxes. Then, it selects the points belonging to the instance applying a binary classifier to the points within the bounding box. For doing this, the authors introduced a **bounding box prediction module** and a series of carefully designed loss functions to directly learn object boolean masks.
```

> The pure 3D-BoNet method does not require post-processing, but it only works on small point clouds (usually composed of 4096 points). It is necessary to split the cloud into spatial blocks to manage more numerous point clouds. A spatial block contains the points belonging to a vertical column of space with a basis measuring a 1-meter square. The number of points in a block is constant to allow the creation of batches. For this reason, from a single spatial block, many processing blocks are created by sampling points. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pure 3D-BoNet method does not require post-processing, but it only works on small point clouds, usually composed of 4096 points. It is necessary to split the cloud into spatial blocks to manage more numerous point clouds. A spatial block contains the points belonging to a vertical column of space with a basis measuring a 1-meter square. The number of points in a block is constant to allow the creation of batches. For this reason, from a single spatial block, many processing blocks are created by sampling points. 
```

## Architecture

<div class="blog-image-container">
    <figure>
        <img class="blog-image" alt="detailed architecture" src="/images/3dbonet/3d-bonet-architecture.png">
        <figcaption>The 3D-BoNet architecture</figcaption>
    </figure>
</div>

The architecture is very similar to a traditional architecture used on images: backbone (feature extractor) and different heads for multi-task learning.

The input point cloud $$\textbf{P} \in \mathbb{R}^{N \times k_0}$$ has $$N$$ points and $$ k_0 $$ feature channels (such as the location coordinates $$\{x,y,z\}$$ and color $$\{r,g,b\}$$). The backbone network extracts **point local features** $$\textbf{F}_l \in \mathbb{R}^{N \times k}$$, where $$k$$ is the length of feature vectors.
Then, local features are aggregated in a **global feature vector** $$\textbf{F}_g \in \mathbb{R}^{1 \times k}$$.

The **Bounding Box Prediction Branch** (BBPB) takes global features $$\textbf{F}_g$$ as input and regresses a **predefined and fixed set of bounding boxes** $$B$$ and the corresponding box scores $$B_s$$.

> During the training, this branch is supervised with ground truth boxes. A **bounding box association layer** associates the most similar predicted bounding box to every ground truth box. The output of the association layer is a list of indices $$\textbf{A}$$ that describes the best pairing between boxes. Paired boxes are then compared with a multi-criteria loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the training, this branch is supervised with ground truth boxes. The **bounding box association layer** associates the most similar predicted bounding box to every ground truth box. The output of the association layer is a list of indices $$\textbf{A}$$ that describes the best pairing between boxes. Paired boxes are then compared with a multi-criteria loss.
```

To supervise the network during the training, the authors introduce a **bounding box association layer** that relies on the [Hungarian algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hungarian_algorithm) to perform the association. A multi-criteria loss pushes the network to minimize the distance between paired boxes. At the same time, the loss promotes the maximization of the coverage of instance points inside predicted boxes.

#### Bounding Box Association Layer

Given $$H$$ predicted bounding boxes $$\textbf{B} \in \mathbb{R}^{H \times 2 \times 3} $$ how can we use ground truth bounding boxes $$\bar{\textbf{B}} \in \mathbb{R}^{T \times 2 \times 3}$$ to supervise the network?

The Bounding Box Association Layer associates to every $$T$$ ground truth box one of the $$H$$ predicted boxes when $$T \leq H$$. When $$T > H$$, the largest $$H$$ ground truth boxes only are retained.

The associations between boxes can be encoded in a boolean **association matrix** $$A \in \mathbb{R}^{H \times T}$$ such that $$\textbf{A}_{i,j} = 1$$ if and only if the $$i^{\text{th}}$$ predicted bbox is assigned to the $$j^{\text{th}}$$ ground truth box.

> At the same time the dissimilarity between any pair of boxes can be stored in the **cost matrix** $$\textbf{C} \in \mathbb{R}^{H \times T}$$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the same time the dissimilarity between any pair of boxes can be stored in the **cost matrix** $$\textbf{C} \in \mathbb{R}^{H \times T}$$.
```

    The vector $$q \in [0, 1]^N$$ is called **point-in-pred-box-probability** and its $$n^\text{th}$$ element is a function of the distance of the $$n^\text{th}$$ point from the vertices of the bounding box such that the deeper the point is inside of the box, the higher the value.

3. **Cross-Entropy Score**. The cross-entropy score between $$q_i$$ and $$\overline{q}_j$$ counterbalances the sIoU: the sIoU cost favors tighter boxes, while the cross-entropy prefers larger and more inclusive boxes.  
    It is formally defined as:

    $$ C^\text{ces}_{i,j} = - \frac{1}{N}\sum_{n=1}^N{[\bar{q}_j^n \log q_i^n + (1 - \bar{q}_j^n)\log(1-q_i^n)]} $$

The final association cost between the $$i^\text{th}$$ predicted bounding box and the $$j^\text{th}$$ ground truth box is defined as:

$$ C_{i,j} = C^{ed}_{i,j} + C^{\text{sIoU}}_{i,j} + C^{\text{ces}}_{i,j}.$$

The entries in the cost matrix $$\mathbf{C}$$ are filled according to this formula and the association matrix $$ \mathbf{A} $$ is computed through the Hungarian algorithm.

#### Loss Functions

> The association matrix $$ \mathbf{A} $$ allows to reorder the predicted boxes placing them in correspondence of the most similar ground truth box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The association matrix $$ \mathbf{A} $$ allows reordering the predicted boxes, placing them in correspondence with the most similar ground truth box.
```

The reordered bounding boxes can then be compared with ground truth bounding boxes using a differentiable **loss function**.
The loss function that supervises the model is composed of two parts.

**Multi-criteria Loss for Box prediction**.  We reuse and minimize the association cost previously defined, i.e.

$$ \mathcal{l_\text{bbox}} = \frac{1}{T} \sum_{t=1}^{T}{C^{ed}_{t,t} + C^{\text{sIoU}}_{t,t} + C^{\text{ces}}_{t,t}}.$$

Here we only minimize the cost of $$T$$ paired boxes, while the remaining $$H-T$$ boxes are ignored.
In practice, $$ \mathcal{l_\text{bbox}} $$ corresponds to the minimal cost found by the Hungarian algorithm.

> **Loss for Box Score Prediction**. The predicted box scores $B_s$ aim to indicate the validity of the corresponding predicted boxes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Loss for Box Score Prediction**. The predicted box scores $$B_s$$ aim to indicate the validity of the corresponding predicted boxes. 
```

For the $$i^\text{th}$$ predicted bounding box $$B_i$$ the estimated vertices and score are fused with processed features $$\tilde{F}_l$$ through concatenation, producing a **box-aware features** $$\widehat{F}_l$$. These features are then fed through shared layers terminating with a sigmoid activation function, predicting a point-level probability mask, denoted as $$M_i$$. The full branch architecture is detailed in the figure above.

The predicted instance masks $$M$$ are associated with the ground truth masks according to the association matrix $$\mathbf{A}$$. Due to the imbalance of instance and background points, the **focal loss** with default hyper-parameters is used instead of standard cross-entropy loss. As in the bounding box prediction branch, only the valid $$T$$ paired masks are used for the loss $$\mathcal{l_\text{pmask}}$$.

### Semantic Segmentation and Instance Segmentation

The 3D-BoNet architecture can be adapted to perform semantic segmentation along with object detection. 
The semantic segmentation task is a pointwise prediction task like the point mask prediction task.

> Thus, the semantic segmentation Branch is very similar to the point mask prediction branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, the semantic segmentation branch is very similar to the point mask prediction branch.
```

In conclusion, the final instance segmentation model is trained end-to-end using a single combined multi-task loss:

$$ \mathcal{l_\text{all}} = \mathcal{l_\text{sem}} + \mathcal{l_\text{bbox}} + \mathcal{l_\text{bbs}} + \mathcal{l_\text{pmask}}. $$

## Management of Large Point Clouds

The 3D-BoNet framework is based on pointwise predictions. This property can be problematic when the point cloud to be analyzed is composed of millions of points,
because the memory consumption of a single forward pass can easily exceed the memory available on a GPU.
The problem is even more relevant during training when gradients have to be stored along with layer outputs.
For this reason, it is necessary to devise a strategy to train and use the model on large point clouds.

### Subsampling

First of all, it is always a good idea to subsample the point cloud to remove points in highly dense regions.
There are many methods to prune points in dense regions: in our implementation, the subsampling preserves only one point per voxel in a grid.

First of all, it is always a good idea to subsample the point cloud to remove points in highly dense regions.

> There are many methods to prune points in dense regions: in our implementation, the subsampling preserves only one point per voxel in a grid.

Reviewer: > First of all, it is always a good idea to subsample the point cloud to remove points in highly dense regions.
> There are many methods to prune points in dense regions: in our implementation, the subsampling preserves only one point per voxel in a grid.

These two sentences are repeated

> More in detail, the 3D space of points is divided virtually into voxels by a cubic grid whose size is a parameter of the experimenter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More in detail, the 3D space of points is divided virtually into voxels by a cubic grid whose size is a parameter of the experiment.
```

For every voxel, a single point is preserved. Its coordinates are obtained by averaging the coordinates of all points in the voxel.

This method is easy to implement, and it can reduce the number of points in the point cloud by one order of magnitude, but it is still not sufficient.

### Block Merging

The authors of 3D-BoNet propose to use Block Merging [2] to split the point cloud into fixed-sized blocks of points. Let us see how blocks are created.
First of all,  the 3D space is partitioned in overlapping squared columns of infinite height. 
For example, for a dataset composed of rooms, the squared base of every column usually measures $$1 \text{m}^2$$,

> and the overlap between consecutive columns is usually $0.5 \text{m}$$ in both directions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the overlap between consecutive columns is usually $$0.5 \text{m}$$ in both directions.
```

In this way, even if the object was divided into several blocks, it is possible to recompose it.

The procedure is visibly complex, and its output depends on the order of blocks. Moreover, since blocks are groups of arbitrary points, the output is not a deterministic function of the input point cloud and the model. 
Finally, the procedure is highly dependent on the size of the voxel, losing all the advantages provided by working directly on sparse points.

## Implementation

The 3D-BoNet framework can be used in combination with any backbone: in our experiments, we implemented and used PointNet or PointNet++.
Our implementation is directly inspired by the [official implementation](https://github.com/Yang7879/3D-BoNet), but it has many advantages over the original code.

Our implementation:
- is compatible with TensorFlow 2, while the original code support TensorFlow 1 only;
- is organized into commented functions and classes;
- reduces the number of custom operations on point cloud from 3 to just 1, replacing custom operations that have to be compiled manually with native TensorFlow functions;

> - implements the BlockMerging method in TensorFlow, allowing to export it with the model in the SavedModel format simplifying the deployment of the model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- implements the Block Merging method in TensorFlow, allowing to export it with the model in the SavedModel format simplifying the deployment of the model
```

Our implementation obtains results comparable with the published ones for the S3DIS dataset.
The S3DIS dataset is the only dataset compatible with the original code released, and, in addition, the authors of the 3D-BoNet paper have published the dataset in its processed form with the point clouds already split into blocks. The reproduction of the results on S3DIS is thus not very hard, but it also hides most of the challenges posed by Block Merging.

We have encountered much more problems while working with the ScanNet dataset. This dataset is composed of point clouds larger than the ones in S3DIS, requiring a heavy subsampling. Furthermore, the division into blocks has to be performed from scratch.
The authors declare great detection results on ScanNet without releasing the necessary code to reproduce them, but we have not attained the stated results. Even after numerous experiments that cover a wide range of hyper-parameters for subsampling and Block Merging, our trained models obtain very low accuracy.
This fact raises some doubt about the effectiveness of the 3D-BoNet framework for the segmentation of large point clouds.

> You can find our implementation on Github: https://github.com/zurutech/3DBoNet2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find our implementation on [Github](https://github.com/zurutech/3DBoNet2).
```

Reviewer 2: I like to show the explicit link.

Reviewer: Perhaps I would only make it clickable

Reviewer 2: Ah sure! I thought that links were automatically clickable.

Reviewer: It makes sense, probably it's a problem of my local settings

Reviewer 2: I have made the link explicit.
